Introduction to javafx.animation (#97)
java/devjava-content: app/pages/learn/01_tutorial/07_rich_client_apps/02_introduction-javafx-animation.md

---
id: javafx.animation
title: Introduction to JavaFX animations
slug: learn/javafx-animations
type: tutorial
group: rich-client-apps
category: javafx
category_order: 2
layout: learn/tutorial.html
subheader_select: tutorials
main_css_id: learn
description: "Learn to create advanced JavaFX animations"
last_update: 2024-05-17
---

The [javafx.animation](javafxdoc:AnimationPackageSummary) package in JavaFX offers a simple framework for creating animations and transitions in a JavaFX application.

> It operates on the principle of [WritableValue\<T\>](javafxdoc:WritableValue) which are used across JavaFX.

Author: No, not really. I am kinda unsure where to place it or if it's a good idea to mention what they are in the beginning.

> It operates on the principle of [WritableValue\<T\>](javafxdoc:WritableValue) which are used across JavaFX.

Reviewer: As it seems to be quite fundamental for many other things, I think it might make sense to explain it before `Animation`. This way, it wouldn't get in between other concepts you are explaining.

It additionally provides a variety of built-in transitions for common effects, support for parallel and sequential transitions, and the ability to handle events upon animation completion.
I will go through all types of animations, starting with `Animation` and its subclasses `Transition` and `Timeline`, before representing a lower level animation with `AnimationTimer`.
While `Transition` provides a simpler and more user-friendly way to create animations, `Timeline` offers greater flexibility and is suitable for more complex animations.
In contrast, `AnimationTimer` is designed for frame-by-frame updates and does not take use of `WritableValue<T>`.

## Animation

The [Animation](javafxdoc:Animation) abstract class provides the core functionality for `Transition` and `Timeline` animations.

An `Animation` consists of multiple properties:
- The `targetFramerate` is the maximum framerate (frames per s) at which this `Animation` will run.

> - The `currentTime` is the current point in time as a `Duration` of the `Animation`.

Author: Well the `currentTime` is the time of the animation. Imagine it is already running for 3 seconds and when I then call the method it is going to be that 3 seconds. JavaDocs describes it with this:
> Defines the Animation's play head position.

Any suggestions to make this clearer?

> - The `currentTime` is the current point in time as a `Duration` of the `Animation`.

Reviewer: For example, you could change it to
> The `currentTime` is the current point in time in the `Animation` as a `Duration`.

- The `rate` defines the direction and speed at which the `Animation` is expected to be played. It supports both positive and negative numbers.
- The `cycleCount` defines the number of cycles of this `Animation`. It can't be changed while running and must be positive.
- The `cycleDuration` is the `Duration` of one cycle of this `Animation`. It is the time it takes to play from start to end of the `Animation` **at the default rate of 1.0**.
- The `totalDuration` indicates the total duration of this `Animation`, including repeats. It is the result of `cycleDuration * cycleCount` or possibly `Duration.INDEFINITE`.
- The `delay` is the `Duration` that delays the `Animation` when starting.
- The `autoReverse` property specifies whether the `Animation` will play in reverse direction on alternating cycles.
- The `onFinished` event handler is used to define additional behavior when the `Animation` finished.
- The `status` represents the current state of the `Animation`, possible states are `PAUSED`, `RUNNING` and `STOPPED`.

Additionally, it provides several useful methods, like `play()`, `playFrom(String cuePoint)`, `pause()`, `stop()` and more to control the animations flow.

> A quick look into the JavaDocs provides a great overview of its functionalities.

Author: To be honest, I don't know. I also couldn't find another reference for this in the project.
What should I prefer?

> A quick look into the JavaDocs provides a great overview of its functionalities.

Reviewer: I am by no means authoritative what should be used. At the end, you can always wait on a review by one of the maintainers of this repository.
However, looking into it, I can see both versions. For example [the docs on the `javadoc` tool](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/technotes/tools/windows/javadoc.html) (which I checked when writing that comment) has a heading "Javadoc Doclets" On the other hand, [this OpenJDK project](https://openjdk.org/projects/javadoc-next/) seems to use JavaDoc so I guess both are fine.

> A quick look into the JavaDocs provides a great overview of its functionalities.

Author: Ok, thanks for looking into it. I will let this open for now and wait for comments by others.

> A quick look into the JavaDocs provides a great overview of its functionalities.

Reviewer: Note that your PR is currently marked as a draft. I don't know whether they want to look at PRs before you say you are ready by marking the PR as such.

> A quick look into the JavaDocs provides a great overview of its functionalities.

Reviewer 2: Speaking of JavaDoc, Javadoc and javadoc: JavaDoc refers to the documentation component and javadoc is the JDK tool. Yet, please use JavaDoc documentation (and avoid using Javadocs, JavaDocs even though you noticed this used in communication).

## Transition
The [Transition](javafxdoc:Transition) abstract class serves as the foundational class for all transitions, presenting a common form of `Animation`.
JavaFX provides a variety of built-in transitions for common [Node](javafxdoc:Node) and [Shape](javafxdoc:Shape) properties.

> **Note:** By default, all transitions, excluding `ParallelTransition` and `SequentialTransition`, utilize the `Interpolator#EASE_BOTH`.

Author: Well, I placed it here, because I explicitly set the interpolator to `LINEAR` in the examples after that, but yeah might be better in the interpolator section.

### Fade Transition

> The [FadeTransition](javafxdoc:FadeTransition) creates a fade effect over a `duration`. 

Author: Hm, basically every transition spans it change across the duration given. Might be even a better idea to remove that information from each example and make it clear at the top.

This is done by updating the `opacity` property of the `Node` at regular intervals.

![FadeTransition](/assets/images/javafx/animation/transition/fade-example.gif)
```java
Circle circle = new Circle(150, 150, 20, Color.GREEN);

FadeTransition transition = new FadeTransition(Duration.seconds(5), circle);
transition.setFromValue(1.0);
transition.setToValue(0);
transition.setInterpolator(Interpolator.LINEAR);

transition.play();
```

### Fill Transition

> The [FillTransition](javafxdoc:FillTransition) creates an animation, that changes the filling of a shape over a `duration`. 

Author: Unsure about this one. Basically copied it from the JavaDocs. That one also has a comma.
https://openjfx.io/javadoc/21/javafx.graphics/javafx/animation/FillTransition.html

> The [FillTransition](javafxdoc:FillTransition) creates an animation, that changes the filling of a shape over a `duration`. 

Reviewer: If it's also in the Javadocs, I'm certain it's fine.

![StrokeTransition](/assets/images/javafx/animation/transition/stroke-example.gif)
```java
Circle circle = new Circle(150, 150, 50, Color.GREEN);
circle.setStrokeWidth(5);

StrokeTransition transition = new StrokeTransition(Duration.seconds(5), circle);
transition.setFromValue(Color.GREEN);
transition.setToValue(Color.BLACK);
transition.setInterpolator(Interpolator.LINEAR);

transition.play();
```

### Translate Transition
The [TranslateTransition](javafxdoc:TranslateTransition) creates a move/translate animation that spans its `duration`.
This is done by updating the `translateX`, `translateY` and `translateZ` properties of the `Node` at regular interval.

![TranslateTransition](/assets/images/javafx/animation/transition/translate-example.gif)
```java
Circle circle = new Circle(50, 50, 10, Color.GREEN);

TranslateTransition transition = new TranslateTransition(Duration.seconds(5), circle);
transition.setToX(200);
transition.setToY(200);
transition.setInterpolator(Interpolator.LINEAR);

transition.play();
```

### Pause Transition
The [PauseTransition](javafxdoc:PauseTransition) executes an `Animation.onFinished` at the end of its `duration`.

### Parallel Transition

> The [ParallelTransition](javafxdoc:ParallelTransition) plays a list of animations in parallel.

Author: Yeah true, thanks for the idea.

### Sequential Transition
The [SequentialTransition](javafxdoc:SequentialTransition) plays a list of animations in sequential order. 
It is not recommended to contain an `Animation`, which is not the last one, with `Duration.INDEFINITE` as this will block all later animations in the sequence.

## Timeline
A [Timeline](javafxdoc:Timeline) is used to define a free form `Animation` of any `WritableValue<T>`. It is helpful if none of the built-in transitions operate on the required properties.

> It consists of a sequential series of `KeyFrame`.

Author: You sure this is the way to have words with ending `s` for code blocks?
It visually looks kinda weird:
![image](https://github.com/java/devjava-content/assets/88111627/664539f1-fb72-44a4-a323-f86d0cdd1b71)

> It consists of a sequential series of `KeyFrame`.

Reviewer: I agree that it might look a bit weird. Do you have a better idea that somewhat preserves the plural? I could also imagine not using a codeblock and just saying "Keyframes"?

In this repository, this kind of formatting is used in [Converting foreach with if](https://dev.java/learn/refactoring-to-functional-style/foreachwithif/#foreach) (`String`s) and [Effects, Gradients and Animations](https://dev.java/learn/javafx/effects/#config-actions) (`MyShape`s though that seems to be an edge case that might be considering to change). So I don't think this is common here.

Anyways, maybe actual reviewers/maintainers have other opinions or suggestions.

> Each `KeyFrame` encapsulates a moment in time (**Cue Point**), and collectively specify how target properties evolve over the entire duration.

Reviewer: "collectively specify how target properties evolve over the entire duration" refers to the combination of all `KeyFrame`s, right?

> > **Warning:** A running Timeline is being referenced from the FX runtime. Infinite Timeline might result in a memory leak if not stopped properly. All the objects with animated properties would not be garbage collected.

Reviewer: Maybe include what to do about it i.e. tell people to stop the timeline when removing the element?

Reviewer 3: Some rephrasing (if this was a quote before, it no longer is, so I removed the ">".):

```suggestion
**Warning:** A running `Timeline` is being referenced from the FX runtime. In an infinite timeline, the objects with animated properties would not be garbage collected, which might result in a memory leak.
```

And I agree with @danthe1st - just append what to do to the end of that. :)

- [Interpolator.EASE_BOTH](javafxdoc:Interpolator.EASE_BOTH): The `EASE_BOTH` interpolator starts slowly, accelerates in the middle and slows down towards the end. It combines the characteristics of `EASE_IN` and `EASE_OUT`.

Additionally, there are two static factory methods for [SPLINE](javafxdoc:Interpolator.SPLINE) and [TANGENT](javafxdoc:Interpolator.TANGENT) interpolation.

[//]: # (ToDo: sync gifs)
Here is a visualization of the Interpolator using the example from [Timeline](#example):
### Discrete
![Discrete](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/discrete-example.gif)
### Linear
![Linear](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/linear-example.gif)
### Ease In
![EaseIn](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/ease-in-example.gif)
### Ease Out
![EaseOut](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/ease-out-example.gif)
### Ease Both
![EaseBoth](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/ease-both-example.gif)

## AnimationTimer

The [AnimationTimer](javafxdoc:AnimationTimer) abstract class provides the lowest level option to create an animation.

> The `handle(long now)` method gets called in each frame while it is active. The timestamp `long now` is the nanoseconds time of the current frame and will be the same for all `AnimationTimer` called during that frame.

Reviewer: This sentence feels a bit weird to me so here's an alternative.
```suggestion
The `handle(long now)` method gets called in each frame while it is active. The timestamp `now` is the time of the current frame in nanoseconds and will be the same for all `AnimationTimer`s called during that frame.
```

> Additionally, the `AnimationTimer` adds the `start()` and `stop()` to handle the lifetime of the animation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the `AnimationTimer` adds `start()` and `stop()` methods to handle the lifetime of the animation.
```

> **Note:** The handle method will be called on the **JavaFX Application Thread** and thus shouldn't do heavy computations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** The `handle` method will be called in the **JavaFX Application Thread** and thus shouldn't do heavy computations.
```

---
id: javafx.animation
title: Introduction to JavaFX animations
slug: learn/javafx-animations
type: tutorial
group: rich-client-apps
category: javafx
category_order: 2
layout: learn/tutorial.html
subheader_select: tutorials
main_css_id: learn
description: "Learn to create advanced JavaFX animations"

> last_update: 2024-05-17

Author: Is there a way to make a toc with nested sections?
Like this:

- Animation
- Transition
  - Fade Transition

> last_update: 2024-05-17

Reviewer: While I don't know about nested sections  you can add a custom table of contents using a [`toc` element](https://github.com/java/devjava-content/blob/da4edd1b9b7b4e046076a490765e15d2d5180f6a/app/pages/learn/01_tutorial/01_your-first-java-app/01_getting-started-with-java.md?plain=1#L14) containing both the section name and an ID to refer to. That ID is (from what I have seen) typically added before each heading using something like `<a id="your-id">&nbsp;</a>`.

> last_update: 2024-05-17

Reviewer 2: No, just the main sections can be part of the table of content.

> last_update: 2024-05-17

Author: What would I benefit from manual toc in that case? The website automatically generated a Tox using markdown header

---

The [javafx.animation](javafxdoc:AnimationPackageSummary) package offers a simple framework for creating animations and transitions in a JavaFX application.
It operates on the principle of [WritableValue\<T\>](javafxdoc:WritableValue) which are used across JavaFX.
It additionally provides a variety of built-in transitions for common effects, support for parallel and sequential transitions, and the ability to handle events upon animation completion.
I will go through all types of animations, starting with `Animation` and its subclasses `Transition` and `Timeline`, before representing a lower level animation with `AnimationTimer`.
While `Transition` provides a simpler and more user-friendly way to create animations, `Timeline` offers greater flexibility and is suitable for more complex animations.
In contrast, `AnimationTimer` is designed for frame-by-frame updates and does not make use of `WritableValue<T>`.

> ## WritableValue

Author: So get rid of the separate section and put it in the introduction as well? 
It is small anyway, so it kinda makes sense.

> ## WritableValue

Reviewer 2: Yes 😄

> ## WritableValue

Reviewer 3: I agree with @ammbra that this is short enough to just fold into the intro. I think it's ok to simply put these two sentences in parentheses after the sentence that first mentions `WritableValue`.

`WritableValue<T>` is an interface that wraps a value that can be read and set. It is commonly used for storing properties in JavaFX UI elements, like
`width` or `height` in the [Rectangle](javafxdoc:Rectangle) shape.

## Animation

> The [Animation](javafxdoc:Animation) abstract class provides the core functionality for `Transition` and `Timeline` animations.

Reviewer 3: Every time a class name is used, it should be in code font (same for a few other occurrences):

```suggestion
The abstract class [`Animation`](javafxdoc:Animation) provides the core functionality for `Transition` and `Timeline` animations.
```

Reviewer 3: Can you add a (half) sentence explaining that `Animation` can only be used through these subclasses, so developers don't get sidetracked into thinking about or even trying to create their own subclasses?

Author: > Every time a class name is used, it should be in code font (same for a few other occurrences):

What about fields and method references? 
For example, `Interpolator.DISCRETE` in the `Interpolator` section.

Reviewer 3: Same. But there is some gray area when talking about a concept with the same name as a class, e.g.:

> The animation takes 2s.

versus

> The `Animation` has a method that...

An `Animation` consists of multiple properties:

> - The `targetFramerate` is the maximum framerate (frames per second) at which this `Animation` will run.

Reviewer 2: A small suggestion on presentation: can you please use a bullet list for enumeration?

Author: Isn't that a bullet list? Do you suggest using a different Markdown syntax for it? If I remember correctly, Markdown supports multiple characters for bullet lists.

- The `rate` defines the direction and speed at which the `Animation` is expected to be played. It supports both positive and negative numbers.
- The `cycleCount` defines the number of cycles of this `Animation`. It can't be changed while running and must be positive.
- The `cycleDuration` is the `Duration` of one cycle of this `Animation`. It is the time it takes to play from start to end of the `Animation` **at the default rate of 1.0**.
- The `totalDuration` indicates the total duration of this `Animation`, including repeats. It is the result of `cycleDuration * cycleCount` or possibly `Duration.INDEFINITE`.
- The `delay` is the `Duration` that delays the `Animation` when starting.
- The `autoReverse` property specifies whether the `Animation` will play in reverse direction on alternating cycles.
- The `onFinished` event handler is used to define additional behavior when the `Animation` finished.
- The `status` represents the current state of the `Animation`, possible states are `PAUSED`, `RUNNING` and `STOPPED`.

Additionally, it provides several useful methods, like `play()`, `playFrom(String cuePoint)`, `pause()`, `stop()` and more to control the animations flow.

> A quick look into the JavaDocs provides a great overview of its functionalities.

Reviewer 3: As discussed in the other thread, "the JavaDocs" needs to be changed. What about this?

```suggestion
A quick look into [its documentation](javafxdoc:Animation) provides a great overview of its functionalities.
```

(Yes, the same URL was already linked above, but when so explicitly mentioning the docs, why make the user reorient to find the right link?)

## Transition
The [Transition](javafxdoc:Transition) abstract class serves as the foundational class for all transitions, presenting a common form of `Animation`.
JavaFX provides a variety of built-in transitions for common [Node](javafxdoc:Node) and [Shape](javafxdoc:Shape) properties.

### Fade Transition
The [FadeTransition](javafxdoc:FadeTransition) creates a fade effect. 
This is done by updating the `opacity` property of the `Node` at regular intervals.

![FadeTransition](/assets/images/javafx/animation/transition/fade-example.gif)
```java
Circle circle = new Circle(150, 150, 20, Color.GREEN);

FadeTransition transition = new FadeTransition(Duration.seconds(5), circle);
transition.setFromValue(1.0);
transition.setToValue(0);
transition.setInterpolator(Interpolator.LINEAR);

transition.play();

> ```

Reviewer 3: These code snippets are not fully self-contained. That is ok if you link to another article that explains how to get a node onto the screen. Can you look into the articles under https://dev.java/learn/javafx/ and possibly a section therein to link to? (Clicking on a header in the table of contents adds its anchor to the URL.) It's enough to add a little sentence (maybe in parentheses under the snippet) with the link in this section only - no need to repeat everywhere.

### Fill Transition
The [FillTransition](javafxdoc:FillTransition) creates an animation, that changes the filling of a shape. 
This is done by updating the `fill` property of the `Shape` at regular intervals.

![FillTransition](/assets/images/javafx/animation/transition/fill-example.gif)
```java
Circle circle = new Circle(150, 150, 20, Color.GREEN);

FillTransition transition = new FillTransition(Duration.seconds(5), circle);
transition.setFromValue(Color.GREEN);
transition.setToValue(Color.BLACK);
transition.setInterpolator(Interpolator.LINEAR);

transition.play();
```

### Translate Transition
The [TranslateTransition](javafxdoc:TranslateTransition) creates a move/translate animation from one position to another in a straight line.

> This is done by updating the `translateX`, `translateY` and `translateZ` properties of the `Node` at regular interval.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is done by updating the `translateX`, `translateY` and `translateZ` properties of the `Node` at regular intervals.
```

I know the docs say "at regular interval" but that's surely a copy-paste error. Let's make sure this article is correct. :) Can you fix that here and below?

Reviewer 3: I posted this in our Slack and already got a reply:

> Yes, this is wrong. I'll file a bug.

I.e. it should be "at regular intervals".

![StrokeTransition](/assets/images/javafx/animation/transition/stroke-example.gif)
```java
Circle circle = new Circle(150, 150, 50, Color.GREEN);
circle.setStrokeWidth(5);

StrokeTransition transition = new StrokeTransition(Duration.seconds(5), circle);
transition.setFromValue(Color.GREEN);
transition.setToValue(Color.BLACK);
transition.setInterpolator(Interpolator.LINEAR);

transition.play();
```

### Pause Transition
The [PauseTransition](javafxdoc:PauseTransition) executes an `Animation.onFinished` at the end of its execution.

### Parallel Transition
The [ParallelTransition](javafxdoc:ParallelTransition) plays a list of animations in parallel.

![ParallelTransition](/assets/images/javafx/animation/transition/parallel-example.gif)
```java
Rectangle rectangle = new Rectangle(50, 50, 10, 10);
rectangle.setFill(Color.GREEN);

TranslateTransition translate = new TranslateTransition(Duration.seconds(5));
translate.setToX(200);
translate.setToY(200);
translate.setInterpolator(Interpolator.LINEAR);

RotateTransition rotate = new RotateTransition(Duration.seconds(5));
rotate.setFromAngle(0);
rotate.setToAngle(360);

> rotate.setInterpolator(Interpolator.LINEAR);

Reviewer 3: So far you've always created the animation by passing a reference to the node it operates on in the constructor. This is the first time, that's not the case and I think it's worth explaining how that functions.

ParallelTransition transition = new ParallelTransition(rectangle, translate, rotate);
transition.play();
```
### Sequential Transition

> The [SequentialTransition](javafxdoc:SequentialTransition) plays a list of animations in sequential order. 

Reviewer 3: Here "list" could be "series". I already wanted to propose that up there, but "playing a series in parallel" is surely bad phrasing. 😂

> It is not recommended to contain an `Animation`, which is not the last one, with `Duration.INDEFINITE` as this will block all later animations in the sequence.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is not recommended to contain an `Animation` that is not the last one with `Duration.INDEFINITE` as this will block all later animations in the sequence.
```

(["that" vs "which" vs ", which"](https://www.merriam-webster.com/grammar/when-to-use-that-and-which))

## Timeline
A [Timeline](javafxdoc:Timeline) is used to define a free form `Animation` on any `WritableValue<T>`. It is helpful if none of the built-in transitions operate on the required properties.

> 

Reviewer 3: This works better as a single paragraph:

```suggestion
```

> It consists of a sequential series of `KeyFrame`s.
> Each `KeyFrame` encapsulates a moment in time (**Cue Point**), and collectively specify how target properties evolve over the entire duration.

Reviewer 3: To resolve the singular/plural conflict:

```suggestion
It consists of a sequential series of `KeyFrame`s, each of which encapsulates a moment in time.
Collectively they specify how target properties evolve over the entire duration.
```

(I removed "Cue Point" as that is mentioned again below.)

> **Warning:** A running Timeline is being referenced from the FX runtime. Infinite Timeline might result in a memory leak if not stopped properly. All the objects with animated properties would not be garbage collected.

### KeyFrame

> A [KeyFrame](javafxdoc:KeyFrame) represents a specific moment in an animation sequence (**Cue Point**) and comprises a collection of `KeyValue` instances that change from start to the given `Duration`.

Reviewer 3: "over the given `Duration`" or "to the end of the given `Duration`"

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

A KeyFrame can have a name which then can be used to identify this `KeyFrame` in an animation, for example for starting from this specific `KeyFrame` using `playFrom(String cuePoint)`.
It is also possible to provide an `onFinished` implementation, which will be invoked when hitting this cue point.

### KeyValue
A [KeyValue](javafxdoc:KeyValue) establishes a mapping between a `WritableValue<T>` and a target value of type `T`. This is used to define the change of a value.
An `Interpolator` can be additionally defined to set the rate of change for this value. The `KeyValue` class is immutable.

### Example
This example of `Timeline` creates a `Circle` which moves 200px in x direction over the duration of 5 seconds:

![TimelineExample](/assets/images/javafx/animation/timeline-example.gif)
```java
Circle circle = new Circle(50, 150, 10, Color.GREEN);

KeyValue x = new KeyValue(circle.translateXProperty(), 200);
KeyFrame frame = new KeyFrame(Duration.seconds(5), x);
Timeline timeline = new Timeline(frame);

timeline.play();
```

> ## Interpolator

Reviewer 3: This section could do with a code snippet showing how an interpolator is used. (Just one, no reason to have one per implementation.)

- [Interpolator.EASE_IN](javafxdoc:Interpolator.EASE_IN): The `EASE_IN` interpolator starts the animation slowly and accelerates as it progresses.
- [Interpolator.EASE_OUT](javafxdoc:Interpolator.EASE_OUT): The `EASE_OUT` interpolator starts quickly and slows down as it progresses.
- [Interpolator.EASE_BOTH](javafxdoc:Interpolator.EASE_BOTH): The `EASE_BOTH` interpolator starts slowly, accelerates in the middle and slows down towards the end. It combines the characteristics of `EASE_IN` and `EASE_OUT`.

Additionally, there are two static factory methods for [SPLINE](javafxdoc:Interpolator.SPLINE) and [TANGENT](javafxdoc:Interpolator.TANGENT) interpolation.

[//]: # (ToDo: sync gifs)
Here is a visualization of the Interpolator using the example from [Timeline](#example):
### Discrete
![Discrete](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/discrete-example.gif)
### Linear
![Linear](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/linear-example.gif)
### Ease In
![EaseIn](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/ease-in-example.gif)
### Ease Out
![EaseOut](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/ease-out-example.gif)
### Ease Both

> ![EaseBoth](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/ease-both-example.gif)

Reviewer 3: We should try to get these into the enumeration above. Having a bunch of additional sections here seems weird.

Author: Maybe get rid of the enumeration and take the same approach as the transition examples?
Creating subsection and having explanation and example at the same place.

## AnimationTimer

The [AnimationTimer](javafxdoc:AnimationTimer) abstract class provides the lowest level option to create an animation.
The `handle(long now)` method gets called in each frame while it is active. The timestamp `now` is the time of the current frame in nanoseconds and will be the same for all `AnimationTimer`s called during that frame.
Additionally, the `AnimationTimer` adds `start()` and `stop()` methods to handle the lifetime of the animation.

**Note:** The `handle` method will be called in the **JavaFX Application Thread** and thus shouldn't do heavy computations.

## Conclusion

> The `javafx.animation` package offers a simple framework for creating dynamic animations within JavaFX applications.

Reviewer 2: This first phrase of the conclusion is exactly the same as the first one in your article. Enforcing a message is great, but would be great if you do that with a similar phrase. You could approach the conclusion with what the reader has learnt throughout the tutorial, instead of repeating the introduction. And...do not be afraid to share that this tutorial taught _this_ and _that_ 

Eg: _Additionally, you are provided with various common `Interpolator` implementations._
would become more relevant to the reader as _Additionally, you have learnt how to control the progression of an animation via several `Interpolator` examples._

---
id: javafx.animation
title: Introduction to JavaFX animations
slug: learn/javafx-animations
type: tutorial
group: rich-client-apps
category: javafx
category_order: 2
layout: learn/tutorial.html
subheader_select: tutorials
main_css_id: learn
description: "Learn to create advanced JavaFX animations"
last_update: 2024-05-22
---

The [javafx.animation](javafxdoc:AnimationPackageSummary) package offers a simple framework for creating animations and transitions in a JavaFX application.

> It operates on the principle of [`WritableValue\<T\>`](javafxdoc:WritableValue), which is used across JavaFX. `WritableValue<T>` is an interface that wraps a value that can be read and set.

Reviewer: When I render this, the backslashes are displayed due to this being an inline codeblock.
![image](https://github.com/java/devjava-content/assets/34687786/85e1675b-689e-4abd-85b2-4b49c7f25059)

```

### Sequential Transition
The [`SequentialTransition`](javafxdoc:SequentialTransition) plays a series of animations in sequential order.
It is not recommended to contain an `Animation` that is not the last one with `Duration.INDEFINITE` as this will block all later animations in the sequence.

### Pause Transition
The [`PauseTransition`](javafxdoc:PauseTransition) creates a pause for a specified `duration`.
This behavior is useful to create a delay in a `SequentialTransition` in which no properties change.

![PauseTransition](/assets/images/javafx/animation/transition/pause-example.gif)
```java
Circle circle = new Circle(150, 150, 20, Color.GREEN);
circle.setStrokeWidth(5);

ScaleTransition smaller = new ScaleTransition(Duration.seconds(1.5));
smaller.setToX(0.25);
smaller.setToY(0.25);
smaller.setInterpolator(Interpolator.LINEAR);

ScaleTransition larger = new ScaleTransition(Duration.seconds(1.5));
larger.setToX(1);
larger.setToY(1);
larger.setInterpolator(Interpolator.LINEAR);

SequentialTransition transition = new SequentialTransition(
        circle,
        smaller,
        new PauseTransition(Duration.seconds(2)),
        larger
);
transition.play();
```

> Note that this code doesn't set the target `Node` in the transitions itself, but instead in the `SequentialTransition` which is the parent transition here.
> It is going to automatically use the target `Node` for child transitions that have no `Node` specified themselves.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that this code only sets a `Node` on the `SequentialTransition`, which is the parent transition here, and not on the individual child transitions.
They will implicitly use their parent transition's `Node`.
```

last_update: 2024-05-22
---

The [javafx.animation](javafxdoc:AnimationPackageSummary) package offers a simple framework for creating animations and transitions in a JavaFX application.
It operates on the principle of [`WritableValue\<T\>`](javafxdoc:WritableValue), which is used across JavaFX. `WritableValue<T>` is an interface that wraps a value that can be read and set.
It is commonly used for storing properties in JavaFX UI elements, like `width` or `height` in the [`Rectangle`](javafxdoc:Rectangle) shape.
It additionally provides a variety of built-in transitions for common effects, support for parallel and sequential transitions, and the ability to handle events upon animation completion.
The article goes through all types of animations, starting with `Animation` and its subclasses `Transition` and `Timeline`, before representing a lower level animation with `AnimationTimer`.
While `Transition` provides a simpler and more user-friendly way to create animations, `Timeline` offers greater flexibility and is suitable for more complex animations.
In contrast, `AnimationTimer` is designed for frame-by-frame updates and does not make use of `WritableValue<T>`.

## Animation

> The abstract class [`Animation`](javafxdoc:Animation) provides the core functionality for `Transition` and `Timeline` animations and can't be implemented directly.

Author: > Aside from that, does it even bring much benefit to mention these classes being `abstract`?

Otherwise the reader could think that this is one way of creating an animation in javafx by creating an instance of it until they notice it is an abstract class and just the base for `Transition` and `Timeline`.

```

### Rotate Transition
The [RotateTransition](javafxdoc:RotateTransition) creates a rotation animation. 

> This is done by updating the `rotate` property of the `Node` at regular interval. 

Author: Not sure about this one. It is copied from official documentation.
https://openjfx.io/javadoc/19/javafx.graphics/javafx/animation/RotateTransition.html

transition.play();
```

### Pause Transition

> The [PauseTransition](javafxdoc:PauseTransition) executes an `Animation.onFinished` at the end of its execution.

Author: Ah yeah true, never thought of that. Not even docs mention that directly.

> The [PauseTransition](javafxdoc:PauseTransition) executes an `Animation.onFinished` at the end of its execution.

Reviewer 3: Can you expand this subsection accordingly?

### Parallel Transition

> The [ParallelTransition](javafxdoc:ParallelTransition) plays a list of animations in parallel.

Reviewer: I don't know about using the word "list" here. After all, it uses varargs for these parameters and not a `List`.

Author: Well I didn't mention the Java `List` here but instead a list in general.
I still agree that it can cause confusion with the Java `List`, but `list of animations` sounds better in my opinion.
Any suggestions?

Reviewer 3: A group?

KeyValue x = new KeyValue(circle.translateXProperty(), 200, Interpolator.DISCRETE);
KeyFrame frame = new KeyFrame(Duration.seconds(5), x);
Timeline timeline = new Timeline(frame);

timeline.play();
```
### Linear
The [`Interpolator.LINEAR`](javafxdoc:Interpolator.LINEAR) interpolator produces a **constant** rate of change between values over time.

![Linear](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/linear-example.gif)

### Ease In
The [`Interpolator.EASE_IN`](javafxdoc:Interpolator.EASE_IN) interpolator starts the animation slowly and accelerates as it progresses.

![EaseIn](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/ease-in-example.gif)

### Ease Out
The [`Interpolator.EASE_OUT`](javafxdoc:Interpolator.EASE_OUT) interpolator starts quickly and slows down as it progresses.

![EaseOut](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/ease-out-example.gif)

### Ease Both
The [`Interpolator.EASE_BOTH`](javafxdoc:Interpolator.EASE_BOTH) interpolator starts slowly, accelerates in the middle and slows down towards the end. 
It combines the characteristics of `EASE_IN` and `EASE_OUT`.

![EaseBoth](/assets/images/javafx/animation/interpolator/ease-both-example.gif)

> Additionally, there are two static factory methods for [`Interpolator.SPLINE`](javafxdoc:Interpolator.SPLINE) and [`Interpolator.TANGENT`](javafxdoc:Interpolator.TANGENT) interpolation.

Author: I was thinking about this as well, but I doubt many going to use it, and it also involves a lot of math.

## AnimationTimer

The [AnimationTimer](javafxdoc:AnimationTimer) abstract class provides the lowest level option to create an animation.
The `handle(long now)` method gets called in each frame while it is active. The timestamp `now` is the time of the current frame in nanoseconds and will be the same for all `AnimationTimer`s called during that frame.
Additionally, the `AnimationTimer` adds `start()` and `stop()` methods to handle the lifetime of the animation.

> **Note:** The `handle` method will be called in the **JavaFX Application Thread** and thus shouldn't do heavy computations.

Reviewer: Just a note This isn't really about _computation_ but more about the time the operation takes. It could as well be I/O (e.g. network calls) that slow it down.

Reviewer 3: I agree. Maybe "should complete quickly"? Or maybe with a bit of extra explanation along the lines of "many such operations need to be executed within a frame and for a smooth 30fps that means everything the transition and all of JavaFX need to compute for it needs to be done within 33ms" ? After either of those options a follow-up sentence could be "That excludes heavy computations and of course all blocking operations like I/O."
